'\" t
.\" pyti_lpc_cmd.1 -- man page for pyti_lpc_cmd
.\" Copyright (C) 2026 Kris Kirby, KE4AHR -- Licensed GPLv3.0
.TH PYTI_LPC_CMD 1 "2026" "pyti_lpc_cmd 1.0.0" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
pyti_lpc_cmd \- decode Texas Instruments TMS5xxx LPC speech bitstreams
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pyti_lpc_cmd
.B mode=\fImode\fR
[\fIparam\fR=\fIvalue\fR ...]
.PP
.B python \-m pyti_lpc_cmd
.B mode=\fImode\fR
[\fIparam\fR=\fIvalue\fR ...]
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pyti_lpc_cmd
is a clean\-room Python decoder for the Texas Instruments TMS5100,
TMS5110, TMS5200, and TMS5220 family of LPC (Linear Predictive Coding)
speech synthesis integrated circuits \(em the same chips used in the
.I Speak\ \&\ Spell
educational toy (1978) and many arcade cabinets of that era.
.PP
The tool reads raw LPC bitstream data from a binary file, inline
decimal CSV, inline hex CSV, a ROM image, or a plain-text data file.
It decodes the bitstream into audio through a 10th\-order lattice
filter vocal\-tract model and writes the result to WAV, AU, AIFF,
or raw PCM.
.PP
All parameters are supplied as
.B key=value
pairs on the command line.
.
.SH MODES
.TP
.B mode=render
Decode an LPC bitstream to an audio file.
This is the primary operating mode.
.TP
.B mode=romlist
Scan a VSM ROM image and emit a list of word addresses and labels to a
text file.  Requires
.BR rom0= .
.TP
.B mode=rendaddrfileseq
Render the LPC word whose address appears on a specific line of an
address-list file (produced by
.BR romlist ).
Advances a persistent line-index counter stored in
.IR zzzline_index.txt .
.TP
.B mode=rendstrfileseq
Render the hex LPC string on a specific line of a plain-text data file.
Advances the same persistent line-index counter.
.TP
.B mode=cleanbrace
Extract the content between
.B {\ }
on each line of a file (removes C/Arduino array syntax).
Writes the cleaned output to
.IR fnameout= .
.TP
.B mode=cleanquote
Extract the content between
.B "\ "
on each line of a file (removes quoted-string syntax).
.
.SH RENDER PARAMETERS
.SS Input source (exactly one required)
.TP
.BI strbin= path
Read raw binary LPC data from \fIpath\fR (max 32 KB).
.TP
.BI str= "label:byte,byte,..."
Inline decimal CSV.  An optional
.I label:
prefix is stripped.  Trailing comma is allowed and ignored.
Example:
.BR "str=isle:165,79,122,211" .
.TP
.BI strhex= "HH,HH,..."
Inline hex CSV (e.g.\&
.BR strhex=A5,4F,7A,D3 ).
Trailing comma is allowed and ignored.
.TP
.BI strfile= path
Read decimal CSV LPC bytes from a text file (max 1 MB).
.TP
.BI strhexfile= path
Read hex CSV LPC bytes from a text file (max 1 MB).
.TP
.BI addr= hexaddr
Read LPC data from a ROM image at hexadecimal address \fIhexaddr\fR.
Requires at least
.BR rom0= .
.SS ROM parameters (used with addr= and romlist)
.TP
.BI rom0= path
ROM binary file mapped starting at address 0x0000 (max 16 KB).
.TP
.BI rom1= path
ROM binary file mapped starting at address 0x4000 (max 16 KB).
.SS Audio output parameters
.TP
.BI wav= path
Output audio file path (default:
.IR zzzout.wav ).
The output format is determined by the file extension:
.BR .wav ,
.BR .au ,
.BR .snd ,
.BR .aiff ,
.BR .aif ,
.BR .raw ,
.BR .pcm .
.TP
.BI srate= Hz
Output sample rate in Hz (default: 8000).
Any rate from 4000 to 192000 is accepted.  Values other than 8000
trigger a windowed-sinc (QDSS) resampler.
.TP
.BI swidth= bits
Bits per sample: \fB8\fR or \fB16\fR (default: 16).
8\-bit output uses unsigned encoding centered at 128;
16\-bit output uses signed little\-endian encoding.
.TP
.BI gain= percent
Output gain as an integer percentage, 0-300 (default: 90).
A value of 90 applies a 0.90x scale factor before integer conversion.
.TP
.B output=st
.TQ
.B output=stereo
Write a two-channel (stereo) audio file (default).
.TP
.B output=mo
.TQ
.B output=mono
Write a single-channel (mono) audio file.
.TP
.B ch=both
Write the decoded signal to both left and right channels (default).
.TP
.B ch=left
.TQ
.B ch=l
.TQ
.B ch=0
Write the decoded signal to the left channel only; right channel is
silent.
.TP
.B ch=right
.TQ
.B ch=r
.TQ
.B ch=1
Write the decoded signal to the right channel only; left channel is
silent.
.SS Synthesis control
.TP
.BI chip= name
Chip variant to use for decoding parameter tables (default:
.BR tms5220 ).
Built\-in names:
.BR tms5100 ,
.BR tms5110 ,
.BR tms5200 ,
.BR tms5220 .
A file path to a
.B .txt
chip definition file is also accepted.
.TP
.B filt=on
Enable the 10th-order lattice filter (default).
.TP
.B filt=off
Disable the lattice filter; all output samples are zero.
Useful for measuring excitation alone.
.TP
.B loopguard=on
Enable the infinite\-loop guard (default).
After 200 consecutive silence frames (~5 seconds of silence), synthesis
halts regardless of remaining bitstream data.  This prevents runaway
decoding of corrupt or padded inputs.
.TP
.B loopguard=off
Disable the infinite\-loop guard.  Synthesis continues until a stop
frame (energy index 0xF) is encountered or the bitstream is exhausted.
.TP
.B verb=on
Print per\-frame diagnostic information to stdout showing frame number,
energy, pitch period, repeat flag, silence/stop state, and interpolation
skip flag.
.TP
.B verb=off
Suppress per\-frame diagnostics (default).
.SS Sequential/file mode parameters
.TP
.BI fnamein= path
Input file for
.B rendaddrfileseq
and
.BR rendstrfileseq .
.TP
.BI fnameout= path
Output file for
.BR romlist ,
.BR cleanbrace ,
and
.BR cleanquote .
Default: depends on mode.
.TP
.BI line= n
Explicit zero-based line index for sequential modes.
If absent, the index is read from
.IR zzzline_index.txt .
.TP
.BI step= n
Number of lines to advance the persistent index after each render
(default: 1).
.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
Error (invalid parameter, file not found, validation failure, or unknown mode).
.
.SH EXAMPLES
.SS Render a binary LPC file to a stereo WAV
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5220 \\
    strbin=word.lpc wav=out.wav
.fi
.SS Render to mono 44.1 kHz 16-bit WAV
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5220 \\
    strbin=word.lpc wav=out.wav srate=44100 output=mono
.fi
.SS Render from inline hex bytes (tms5220 reference vector)
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5220 \\
    strhex=A5,4F,7A,D3,3C,5A,8F,AE wav=snippet.wav
.fi
.SS Render from inline decimal CSV with label prefix
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5100 \\
    str=Affirmative:165,79,122,211,60,90 wav=affirm.wav
.fi
.SS Render a word from a Speak & Spell ROM image
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5220 \\
    rom0=speakspell_r0.bin rom1=speakspell_r1.bin \\
    addr=0220 wav=affirmative.wav
.fi
.SS List all words in a ROM
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=romlist \\
    rom0=speakspell_r0.bin rom1=speakspell_r1.bin \\
    fnameout=word_list.txt
.fi
.SS Step through ROM words one at a time (retains position between calls)
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=rendaddrfileseq \\
    rom0=speakspell_r0.bin fnamein=word_list.txt wav=current.wav
.fi
.SS Render 8-bit output to the left channel only with verbose logging
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5220 \\
    strbin=word.lpc wav=left.wav output=stereo ch=left \\
    swidth=8 verb=on
.fi
.SS Render with a custom chip definition file
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=/data/mychip.txt \\
    strbin=word.lpc wav=out.wav
.fi
.SS Disable the infinite-loop guard for a specially crafted stream
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=render chip=tms5220 \\
    strbin=long_stream.lpc wav=out.wav loopguard=off
.fi
.SS Clean up a C Arduino-style LPC array
.nf
pyti_lpc_cmd mode=cleanbrace \\
    fnamein=talkie_data.cpp fnameout=clean.txt
.fi
.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I zzzout.wav
Default output audio file (in the current working directory).
.TP
.I zzzline_index.txt
Persistent line-index counter for
.B rendaddrfileseq
and
.B rendstrfileseq
modes.
.TP
.I zzzaddr_list.txt
Default output file for
.B romlist
mode.
.TP
.I zzzclean.txt
Default output file for
.B cleanbrace
and
.B cleanquote
modes.
.
.SH NOTES
.SS Bit reversal
Each byte of the LPC bitstream is bit-reversed (LSB <-> MSB) before
extraction.  This matches the original TI hardware which shifts bits
LSB-first off the ROM.  The three-stage reversal (nibble swap, pair
swap, bit swap) is applied to every byte individually.
.SS Reference test vector
The first 16 bytes of a TMS5220 "Affirmative" utterance are:
.nf
A5 4F 7A D3 3C 5A 8F AE C8 A9 70 ED BD BA 2A 3B
.fi
A full 223-byte file renders to 35 frames (33 data + 2 drain),
producing 7000 samples.  The stereo 16-bit 8 kHz WAV is exactly
28044 bytes; mono 16-bit is 14044 bytes; mono 8-bit is 7044 bytes.
.SS Chip variants
.TS
tab(	) allbox;
l l l l .
Chip	Pitch bits	Chirp len	Notes
tms5100	5	50	Speak & Spell first edition
tms5110	5	32	Later Speak & Spell variants
tms5200	6	52	Hex chirp table
tms5220	6	52	Most common; default
.TE
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR python3 (1),
.BR sox (1),
.BR ffmpeg (1)
.PP
Project source and documentation:
.I https://github.com/ke4ahr/PyTI_LPC_CMD
.
.SH AUTHOR
Kris Kirby, KE4AHR
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Kris Kirby, KE4AHR.
Licensed under the GNU General Public License v3.0 or later.
See
.I https://www.gnu.org/licenses/gpl\-3.0.html
for the full license text.
